---
title: Hello world
description: "Personal blog full of shitty opinions, bad language and usefull tips!"
ogImage: talk
lang: en
tags:
  - 💬 Talk
---

## Hi...planet?
Hello! If you are reading this i am probably dead... hopefully not lol. But 
socialy its quite probable. This is actually my first blog post outside of development
series. While writing those lines i am amuzed of myself. Keeping a blog will be 
definetly hard since i am not able to post anything on my social media in time. 
So please.. dont expect me to amuze you every day on time. You know... maybe just
check in once in a month :D Anyways.. these "side talks" will be focused more 
on my personal life, but i dont want to bother you with bullshit. So i will try 
to add something usefull to each of my blog posts. Today i have got something small,
but maybe it can help you with your website :) 
## Something usefull?
So you might be wondering... How that ape get this cool website online? And how come hes 
actually not paying anything for it! SHOCKER! Well me and my collegue [Daniel Hruška](https://hruska.design/) have
found some cool ideas in the depths of github. There is actually a very smart german web designer
whos using this javascript compiler, that can actually compile your blog posts written in 
markdown into html5 files. "OK CHAMP - So you have got very primitive backend and how come
you dont pay shit?" Well Johny github is actually quite usefull in that matter, you can 
create up to ONE personal website and host it completly free on your profile. Only thing 
you actually need to setup (if you want too) and pay for (a little bit) is your own personal 
domain. "But you said FREE damn you!" Well... if you dont have 250 pesos/year you are fucked yea. 
Sorry about that. 
<br> </br>

If you are still interested you can educate your self about this website solution here [Minimal-viable-blog](https://github.com/dennisreimann/gulp-mvb) 
<br> </br>

And since i havent actually presented anything of my own creations. Here you can steal 
my html structure of my layered blog posts which you can see on the main blog page.
Have fun doing the CSS sucker. 
<br></br>
PUG/HTML
```js
nav.nav(role='navigation')
            ul.nav__list
              each tag, name in mvb.groupedArticles.byTag 
                br
                label.task__tag2.task__tag--copyright
                  input#group-1(type='checkbox' hidden='')
                  label.shrink.fa.fa-angle-right= name
                    span
                  ul.group-list  
                    each article in tag
                      br 
                      li
                        a.articlelink(href=`articles/${article.id}.html`)= article.title
```

Just kidding. I will include the CSS later ;) For now it a mess haha. 
<br></br>
Stay tunned. CYA!

## Thats it for today :)

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/c/ViktorBřenekYT)
[Discord](https://discord.com/invite/2Uj6N5N)

[[toc]]